PEP 678: Update proposal with `.add_note()` and acknowledgements section (#2331)
python/peps: pep-0678.rst

Exception objects are typically initialized with a message that describes the
error which has occurred.  Because further information may be available when
the exception is caught and re-raised, or included in an ``ExceptionGroup``,

> this PEP proposes to add ``BaseException.with_note(note, *, replace=False)``, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this PEP proposes to add ``BaseException.add_note(note, *, replace=False)``, a
```

  timestamp, or other explanation with each of several errors - especially if
  re-raising them in an ``ExceptionGroup``.
- programming environments for novices can provide more detailed descriptions
  of various errors, and tips for resolving them.

Existing approaches must pass this additional information around while keeping
it in sync with the state of raised, and potentially caught or chained,
exceptions. This is already error-prone, and made more difficult by :pep:`654`
``ExceptionGroup``\ s, so the time is right for a built-in solution.  We
therefore propose to add:

> - a new method ``BaseException.with_note(note, *, replace=False)``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a new method ``BaseException.add_note(note, *, replace=False)``,
```

- ``BaseException.__notes__``, a read-only field which is a tuple of zero or

>   more notes strings, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  more note strings, and
```

Non-goals
---------
Tracking multiple notes as a tuple, rather than by concatenating strings when

> notes are added, is intended to maintain the distinction between strings
> which might be translated by packages such as ``friendly-traceback``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notes are added, is intended to maintain the distinction between the
individual notes, which might be required in specialized use cases, such 
as translation of the notes by packages like as ``friendly-traceback``.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
notes are added, is intended to maintain the distinction between the
individual notes. This might be required in specialized use cases, such 
as translation of the notes by packages like ``friendly-traceback``.
```

Based on @iritkatriel 's suggestion, but splitting it into two sentences to avoid a run-on, excessive commas and a hard to parse structure. I've also fixed an editing typo.

However, ``__notes__`` is *not* intended to carry structured data.  If your
note is for use by a program rather than display to a human, `we recommend
<https://discuss.python.org/t/accepting-pep-654-exception-groups-and-except/10813/26>`__
instead (or additionally) choosing a convention for an attribute, e.g.
``err._parse_errors = ...`` on the error or ``ExceptionGroup``.

As a rule of thumb, we suggest that you should prefer `exception chaining
<https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html#exception-chaining>`__ when the

> error is going to be re-raised or handled as an individual error, and prefer

Reviewer: If you don't know the type of the exception, and you don't want to change it, chaining may not be appropriate.

``.add_note()`` when you are collecting multiple exception objects to handle
together or later. [1]_

Specification
=============

> ``BaseException`` gains a new read-only field ``__notes__``, an initially empty

Reviewer 2: Is a "field" a defined Python term in this context? Or would the correct term be "attribute", as it was before?

> tuple of strings, and a new method ``.add_note(note: str | None, *, replace:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tuple, and a new method ``.add_note(note: str | None, *, replace:
```

bool=False)``. If ``note`` is not ``None``, it is added to the exception's
notes which appear in the standard traceback after the exception string. If
``replace`` is true, all previously existing notes are removed before the new
one is added. To clear all notes, use ``add_note(None, replace=True)``. A

> :exc:`TypeError` is raise if ``note`` is neither a string nor ``None``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``TypeError`` is raised if ``note`` is neither a string nor ``None``.
```

Fix error in legacy docutils build; docutils doesn't support the Sphinx-only `:exc:` directive (and it doesn't really make a difference here anyway unless we format it specially in CSS).

Also, fix grammar.

> When an exception with one or more notes is displayed, each note is displayed
> on a new line starting immediately after the exception message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an exception is displayed by the interpreter's builtin traceback rendering code,
its notes (if there are any) appear immediately after the exception message, in the order
in which they were added, with each note starting on a new line.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an exception is displayed by the interpreter's builtin traceback-rendering code,
its notes (if there are any) appear immediately after the exception message, in the order
in which they were added, with each note starting on a new line.
```

The hyphen is needed grammatically here and helps disambiguate and clarify the syntax.

As a rule of thumb, we suggest that you should prefer `exception chaining
<https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/errors.html#exception-chaining>`__ when the
error is going to be re-raised or handled as an individual error, and prefer

> ``.add_note()`` when you do not know or wish to change the exception type or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``.add_note()`` when you want to avoid changing the exception type or
```

the language specification, with `unassigned names reserved for future use and
subject to breakage without warning
<https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#reserved-classes-of-identifiers>`__.
We are also unaware of any code which *would* be broken by adding ``__notes__``.

While ``add_note()`` is a fairly common method name, our Google and GitHub

> searches did not find any exception classes which define such a method.

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful to link to them. grep.app is a particularly useful tool here

<https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#reserved-classes-of-identifiers>`__.
We are also unaware of any code which *would* be broken by adding ``__notes__``.

> While ``add_note()`` is a fairly common method name, our Google and `GitHub

Reviewer 2: I can understand why it may be confusing, but what the text seems to be saying is that it is a common method name _overall_, it didn't appear to be used for any _execption subclasses_ in particular.

> While ``add_note()`` is a fairly common method name, our Google and `GitHub

Author: Yep.  Might be clearer to say:

> We were also unable to find any code which would be broken by the addition of `BaseException.add_note()` - while searching Google and GitHub finds several definitions of an `.add_note()` method, none of them are on a subclass of `BaseException`.

which error. The new ``ExceptionGroup`` type intensifies these existing
challenges.

> Keeping the ``__notes__`` attached to the exception object, like the
> traceback, eliminates these problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keeping the ``__notes__`` attached to the exception object, like the
traceback currently is, eliminates these problems.
```

This was slightly ambiguous to me on first read as to the intended meaning of "like the traceback"; this is intended to clarify that.

    You can reproduce this error by ...

**In cases where these two problems do not apply, we encourage use of exception
chaining rather than** ``__notes__``.

A mutable ``__note__`` attribute
--------------------------------
The first draft and implementation of this PEP defined a single attribute
``__note__``, which defaulted to ``None`` but could have a string assigned.
This is substantially simpler if, and only if, there is at most one note.

To promote interoperability and support translation of error messages by
libraries such as ``friendly-traceback``, without resorting to dubious parsing

> heuristics, we therefore settled on the ``.add_note()``-and-``__notes__` API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
heuristics, we therefore settled on the ``.add_note()``-and-``__notes__`` API.
```

Fix RST syntax error causing build failure

Subclass Exception and add note support downstream
--------------------------------------------------
Traceback printing is built into the C code, and reimplemented in pure Python

> in traceback.py. To get ``err.__notes__`` printed from a downstream

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in ``traceback.py``. To get ``err.__notes__`` printed from a downstream
```

Furthermore, we do not believe that the problem we are solving requires or
justifies new language syntax.

Acknowledgements
================

> We wish to thank the many people who have assisted us through conversation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I wish to thank the many people who have assisted us through conversation,
```

Reviewer 2: In formal and academic publishing circles (at least in AmE), for documents such is this, use of "I" is considered verboten in this context and "we" is preferred even if only a single author is listed. Therefore, from the perspective of a PEP editor, this is a valid choice for a PEP author to use here, if they prefer it, unless there is something I've overlooked specific to this case.

Additionally, this is the voice used throughout the rest of the PEP (including on the line above) so it would be inconsistent to change it here.

code review, design advice, and implementation: Adam Turner, Alex Grönholm,
André Roberge, Barry Warsaw, Brett Cannon, CAM Gerlach, Carol Willing, Damian,
Erlend Aasland, Gregory Smith, Guido van Rossum, Irit Katriel, Jelle Zijlstra,
Ken Jin, Kumar Aditya, Mark Shannon, Matti Picus, Petr Viktorin, Zac

> Hatfield-Dodds, and psudeonymous commenters on Discord and Reddit.

Reviewer: Maybe remove yourself because you're the one doing the thanking.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hatfield-Dodds, and pseudonymous commenters on Discord and Reddit.
```

> Ken Jin, Kumar Aditya, Mark Shannon, Matti Picus, Petr Viktorin, Zac
> Hatfield-Dodds, and psudeonymous commenters on Discord and Reddit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ken Jin, Kumar Aditya, Mark Shannon, Matti Picus, Petr Viktorin,
and pseudonymous commenters on Discord and Reddit.
```

Implemented @iritkatriel 's and @JelleZijlstra 's suggestions
